Add documentation - Getting Started : Realtime Engine (#1817)
kuzzleio/kuzzle: doc/2/guides/getting-started/5-realtime-engine/index.md

---
code: false
type: page
title: Realtime Engine
description: Subscribe to realtime notifications from the database
order: 500
---

# Realtime Engine

Kuzzle integrates an advanced realtime engine. It can work in a classic pub/sub mode but also as a realtime database notification engine.

> **Any change occuring on the database is likely to generate a realtime notification** about the creation, modification and deletion of documents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Any change occuring on the database can generate a realtime notification** about the creation, modification and deletion of documents.
```

A filter system also allows clients to receive notifications only according to their interest in certain types of documents.

> Subscription to realtime notifications is client-side and does not require additional server-side code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Subscription to realtime notifications is performed client-side and does not require additional server-side code.
```

::: 

Kourou is now waiting for realtime notifications about changes in our collection.

We are going to create a new document in the Admin Console to trigger one!

Open the [Admin Console](http://console.kuzzle.io/#/data/nyc-open-data/yellow-taxi) and then create a new document. 

Then you should receive a notification about the created document in your terminal:

```bash
 🚀 Kourou - Subscribes to realtime notifications
 
 [ℹ] Connecting to ws://localhost:7512 ...
 [ℹ] Waiting for realtime notifications on "nyc-open-data":"yellow-taxi" ...

 [ℹ] New notification triggered by API action "document:create"
 {
  "_id": "dvIdJ3UB1MqPtuLKxKDS",
  "_source": {
    "name": "Aschen",
    "city": "Antalya",
    "age": 27,
    "_kuzzle_info": {
      "author": "-1",
      "createdAt": 1602679063751,
      "updatedAt": null,
      "updater": null
    }
  },
  "_version": 1
}
```

### Use subscription filters

Kuzzle allows you to use filters to receive only the notifications matching specific types of documents.  

Again, we are going to subscribe to notifications but only for documents where:
  - `age` is greater than `30`
  - `city` is equal to `Antalya`

> This filter must be written using Koncorde Filter DSL, which is a little inspired by Elasticsearch DSL:

Reviewer 2: TODO: add a link to the Koncorde DSL handbook (when it will be ready). How do we express such reminders?

Author: We just add links who doesn't exists yet like `[Koncorde Filter DSL](/core/2/some-link)`

> This filter must be written using Koncorde Filter DSL, which is a little inspired by Elasticsearch DSL:

Author: ```suggestion
This filter must be written using [Koncorde Filter DSL](/core/2/some-link), which is a little inspired by Elasticsearch DSL:
```

> This filter must be written using Koncorde Filter DSL who is a little inspired by Elasticsearch DSL:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This filter must be written using Koncorde Filter DSL, which is a little inspired by Elasticsearch DSL:
```

::: info

> Koncorde is part of Kuzzle Realtime Engine and handles subscription filters.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Koncorde is part of the Kuzzle Realtime Engine and handles subscription filters.
```

> Koncorde is part of Kuzzle Realtime Engine and handle subscription filters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Koncorde is part of Kuzzle Realtime Engine and handles subscription filters.
```

:::

```json
{
  "and": [
    {
      "range": {
        "age": { "gt": 30 }
      },
    },
    {
      "equals": {
        "city": "Antalya"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

Now we can subscribe again with our filter:

```bash
$ kourou realtime:subscribe nyc-open-data yellow-taxi '{
  and: [
    {
      range: {
        age: { gt: 30 }
      }
    },
    {
      equals: {
        city: "Antalya"
      }
    }
  ]
}'
```

> Then we are going to create some documents:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then we create 10 documents using the [`sdk:execute` command in Kourou](https://github.com/kuzzleio/kourou#kourou-sdkexecute):
```

```bash
$ kourou sdk:execute --code '
  for (let i = 1; i <= 10; i++) {
    await sdk.document.create("nyc-open-data", "yellow-taxi", {
      name: `Yagmur-${i}`,
      city: i % 2 ? "Antalya" : "Istanbul",
      age: 27 + i
    });
  }'
```

> <details><summary>You should receive only those 3 notifications:</summary>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<details><summary>You should receive only the following 3 notifications (that correspond with the filters specified in the subscription):</summary>
```
